How Much Sodium Should I Eat Per Day? | American Heart Association
Americans consume far too much sodium — on average, over 3,100 milligrams daily. The American Heart Association recommends no more than 2,300 milligrams (mg) a day and an optimal goal of no more than 1,500 mg a day for most adults.
For most people, cutting back by 1,000 mg a day can improve blood pressure. This can help support heart, kidney and metabolic health (the way the body creates, stores and uses energy.)
Keep in mind that more than 70% of the sodium Americans eat comes from packaged, prepared and restaurant foods — not the saltshaker.
Most of us probably underestimate how much sodium we eat. Limiting sodium in our diet is part of an overall healthy eating pattern.
How can I tell how much sodium I’m eating?
Look at the Nutrition Facts label on the side or back of a food package to find the amount of sodium in one serving. The Nutrition Facts label lists the number of servings in the package at top, as well as the nutritional content of the food per serving below.
A list of all ingredients in the food appears separately on the package. Check this list for words such as “sodium,” “salt” and “soda.” The total sodium shown on the Nutrition Facts label includes the sodium from salt and any other sodium-containing ingredient in the product. For example, this includes preservatives or flavorings such as sodium nitrate, sodium citrate, monosodium glutamate (MSG) or sodium benzoate.
Note the serving size on the Nutrition Facts label. If your portion size equals two servings of a product, you’re actually eating twice the sodium listed.
Sodium-related terms you may see on food packages:
Salt/sodium-free — Less than 5 mg of sodium per serving
Very low sodium — 35 mg or less per serving
Low sodium — 140 mg or less per serving
Reduced sodium — At least 25% less sodium per serving than the item’s usual sodium level
Light in sodium or lightly salted — At least 50% less sodium than the regular product
No salt added or unsalted — No salt is added during processing, but these products may not be salt/sodium-free unless stated
Remember: Sodium levels vary in the same foods depending on the brand or restaurant. Keeping a daily tally of how much sodium you consume can help you make better choices.
Can you eat too little sodium?
It’s unlikely that you’re not getting enough sodium in your diet. And there’s no reliable evidence that eating less than 1,500 mg per day is a risk for most people.
The body needs only a small amount of sodium (less than 500 mg per day) to function properly. That’s a smidgen — the amount in less than 1/4 teaspoon. Very few people come close to eating less. Plus, healthy kidneys are great at retaining the sodium that your body needs.
The guideline to reduce to 1,500 mg of sodium daily may not apply to people who lose big amounts of sodium in sweat. These include competitive athletes and workers exposed to major heat stress, such as foundry workers and firefighters.
The guideline also doesn’t apply to people directed otherwise by their health care team. If you have medical conditions or other special dietary needs or restrictions, check with your health care team.
Use the Sodium Tracker
Our sodium tracker (PDF) is an easy way to keep tabs on how much sodium you’re getting in your diet. Just jot down what you eat for meals and snacks each day and the amount of sodium each food contains.
At the end of the day add up the total amount of sodium you consumed. This exercise can help you make better choices if needed. Sometimes a small change can bring big results when it comes to your health!
The American Heart Association has lots of resources to help you stay on track.
Join Healthy for Good™ and get tips, recipes, and inspiration to build healthy habits.
First Name (required)
Last Name (required)
Email (required)
Zip Code (required)
I agree to the Terms and Conditions and Privacy Policy.
Contact Id
Form ID
Form Name
Form Submission Date
Form URL
Campaign Content
Campaign Source
Campaign Medium
Last Reviewed: Jul 15, 2025
Related Articles
Top 10 Myths About Cardiovascular Disease
Healthy for Good™ Sponsors and Supporters
View All Healthy for Good Sponsors and Supporters
