Nutrition and Kidney Disease, Stages 1-5 (Not on Dialysis) | National Kidney Foundation Skip to main content
Nutrition and Kidney Disease, Stages 1-5 (Not on Dialysis)
Back to Top
Diseases and conditionsDiet and nutritionKidney diseases and conditionsEarly stage kidney disease
Last updated: March 18, 2024
Medically reviewed by: NKF Patient Education Team
Good nutrition helps people with kidney disease stay healthy. If your kidneys are not working so well, some changes in the diet help you feel better.
Table of Contents
Importance of Good Nutrition for People with Chronic Kidney Disease
The Basics of Good Nutrition
Changes to My Diet
Registered dietitians and kidney disease
Nutrients to manage in chronic kidney disease
Fluids
Calories
Vitamins and Minerals
Questions for your healthcare team
Resources
Importance of Good Nutrition for People with Chronic Kidney Disease
Making healthy food choices is important to us all, and especially if you have chronic kidney disease (CKD). Good nutrition helps:
Slow down the progression of kidney disease
Provide energy to do your daily tasks
Prevent infection
Maintain muscle mass and strength
Maintain a healthy weight
The Basics of Good Nutrition
A well-balanced diet gives you the right amounts of protein, calories, vitamins, and minerals each day. Eating a healthy diet, staying physically active, and taking all your medicines as prescribed are all important parts to keeping you healthy and feeling well.
There is not only one correct eating plan for everyone with kidney disease. What you can or cannot eat may change over time, depending on your kidney function and other factors. Find more information and about kidney disease and nutrition: NKF Nutrition Hub
Changes to My Diet
Your kidneys help keep the right balance of nutrients and minerals in your body. But if you have kidney disease, your kidneys may not do this job very well. You may need to make some changes to your diet.
There is not only one correct eating plan for everyone with kidney disease. What you can or cannot eat may change over time, depending on your kidney function and other factors. If you are following a certain eating plan for diabetes or heart disease, you will continue to do so. What is good for your diabetes and heart is good for your kidney. A kidney dietitian will help you combine these eating plans.
Registered dietitians and kidney disease
Ask your doctor about meeting with a Registered Dietitian with special training in kidney disease.
A dietitian can:
Teach you to make the best food choices based on your lifestyle and lab tests
Help to make changes in your diet to help you better control diabetes and high blood pressure
Help you to keep your kidney disease from getting worse
Meeting with a dietitian is a service covered by Medicare and may also be covered by other types of insurance. You may need to call your insurance provider to see if your plan covers meeting with a dietitian.
Are you looking for nutrition guidance? Contact a CKD dietitian in your area. CKD Kidney Dietitian Directory
Nutrients to manage in chronic kidney disease
People with CKD may need to control the amount or type of one or more nutrients:
Sodium
Potassium
Phosphorus
Calcium
Protein
Eating the right amount or type of one or more of these nutrients may help control the buildup of waste and fluid in your blood. This means your kidneys do not have to work as hard to remove the extra waste and fluid. If your kidney disease gets worse, you may need to limit other nutrients as well. Your dietitian or healthcare provider will tell you if you need to do this based on your blood test results.
Sodium and your CKD Diet: How to Spice Up Your Cooking
Healthy kidneys control how much sodium is in your body. If your kidneys do not work well, too much sodium can cause fluid buildup, swelling, higher blood pressure, and strain on your heart. Your dietitian or healthcare provider can tell you the right amount of sodium you should have each day.
Potassium
Potassium is important for muscle function, including the heart muscle. Too much or too little potassium in the blood can be very dangerous. The amount of potassium you need is based on how well your kidneys are working and your medications. Your dietitian or healthcare provider can tell you about foods with potassium and the right amount for you to eat each day.
Potassium from animal foods is absorbed at a higher rate than potassium from plants. Elevated blood sugars can also increase potassium levels. Some high-potassium foods include milk, meat, bananas, oranges and orange juice, cantaloupe, dried fruits, winter squash and salt substitutes.
Phosphorus and Your Diet
As kidney function gets lower, extra phosphorus can start building up in the blood. High phosphorus levels can cause bones to get weaker. Your dietitian or healthcare provider can tell you if you need to limit goods that are high in phosphorus.
High phosphorus foods include dairy products, organ meats, colas, deli meats, and processed foods with phosphate additives.
Avoid processed foods that have additives with PHOS like disodium PHOSphate. You can find these additives in the ingredients list on food labels.
Calcium
Foods that are good sources of calcium are often high in phosphorus. Your dietitian or healthcare provider will tell you if you need to limit calcium. Before taking any over-the-counter vitamin D or calcium supplements, talk to your healthcare provider.
Protein
Your body needs protein to help build muscle, repair tissue, and fight infection. Plant-based protein like beans and nuts are easier on the kidneys than animal proteins like meat and dairy products. This is because plant proteins produce less acid in the body than meat proteins. More acid in body can damage the kidneys.
Having very large amounts of protein, especially in the form of unnecessary supplements, can be stressful on the kidneys. But if protein intake is too low, you can lose muscle mass, become weak, and increase the body’s acid load, so it is important to eat the right amount each day. The amount of protein you need is based on:
Your weight
Your age – growing children and adolescents, and older people, need more protein
The amount of protein in your urine, and depending on your type of kidney disease
Your dietitian or healthcare provider can tell you how much protein you should eat.
Fluids
The Dos and Don'ts of Fluid Management in Chronic Kidney Disease
Most people in the early stages of kidney disease do not need to limit how much fluid they drink. If you do not know your stage of kidney disease, ask your healthcare provider. If your kidney disease worsens, your dietitian or healthcare provider can let you know if you need to limit fluids and how much to drink each day. Fluids may need to be limited based on how much urine you make each day, and if fluid build-up in your body is causing swelling or stress on your heart or lungs.
Fluids include any food that is liquid at room temperature such as beverages, soups, gelatin, frozen desserts, and ice.
Calories
Every person is different in terms of the calories they need each day. Calories are like fuel. If you don’t eat enough, your body will take protein from the muscles for energy. It’s important to make sure you get the right number of calories. If you don’t, you may get weak and damage your kidneys. Eating the right number of calories will:
Help you stay at a healthy weight
Give you the energy to do your daily tasks
Help your body use the protein in food to build muscle and tissues
Too many calories can cause extra weight gain, which can burden the kidneys. If you are overweight, some weight loss may be helpful. If weight loss is desired or you have diabetes, you should meet with a dietitian to set up a plan based on your kidney blood tests, current food choices, and daily activities.
Vitamins and Minerals
Vitamins and Minerals in Chronic Kidney Disease
Most people get enough vitamins and minerals to stay healthy by eating a variety of foods each day. But kidney patients may need to limit some of these foods. If so, you may need to take special vitamin or mineral supplements, but only if a dietitian or healthcare provider tells you to. Some vitamins or mineral supplements may be harmful to people with kidney disease. You should check with your healthcare provider before taking any medications you can buy without a prescription. Some supplements may be harmful to people with kidney disease. Over the counter vitamin and mineral supplements may contain too much phosphorous and potassium. You should also avoid taking herbal supplements.
Questions for your healthcare team
What type of diet is best for my individual needs?
Can you refer me to a registered dietitian nutritionist (RDN) who is an expert in kidney disease?
If I need a vitamin and mineral supplement, can you prescribe one that is covered by Medicare or Medicaid?
Can you check my blood to see if my acid level is too high? If it’s too high, how can I change my diet to help lower the acid?
Where can I find financial and other support in getting healthy foods and meals for people with CKD?
Am I getting enough protein in my diet to maintain my muscle mass?
Close to needing dialysis? Take our quiz to see if home dialysis is right for you.
Resources
Nutrition and Chronic Kidney Disease (Stages 1-5, Not on Dialysis): Getting the most out of the foods you eat
Food Is Medicine Coalition List of Medically Tailored Meals Agencies (free meals for people with CKD)
Find a Kidney Dietitian
Your Guide to Create a Balanced Kidney-Friendly Meal
How helpful was this content?
Voting....
Thanks!
Select ratingGive it 1/5Give it 2/5Give it 3/5Give it 4/5Give it 5/5
This content is provided for informational use only and is not intended as medical advice or as a substitute for the medical advice of a healthcare professional.
© 2026 National Kidney Foundation, Inc.
Kidney Topics
Kidney Stone Diet Plan and Prevention
Prevention, daily life, and wellbeing,
Diseases and conditions,
Diet and nutrition,
Disease prevention,
Kidney diseases and conditions,
Kidney stones
Stage 3a Chronic Kidney Disease (CKD)
Diseases and conditions,
Kidney diseases and conditions,
Early stage kidney disease
Dairy and Our Kidneys
Diet and nutrition,
Food and drink,
Dairy
Fluid Overload in a Dialysis Patient
Treatments and therapies,
Diseases and conditions,
Dialysis,
Signs and symptoms,
Fluid overload and edema
6-Step Guide to Protecting Kidney Health
Diseases and conditions,
Kidney diseases and conditions,
Chronic kidney disease
Tomatoes
Diet and nutrition,
Food and drink,
Fruits and vegetables
Stage 3b Chronic Kidney Disease (CKD)
Diseases and conditions,
Kidney diseases and conditions,
Early stage kidney disease
Six Easy Ways to Prevent Kidney Stones
Diseases and conditions,
Kidney diseases and conditions,
Kidney stones
Superfoods
Prevention, daily life, and wellbeing,
Diet and nutrition,
Food and cooking,
Food and drink
See More Kidney Topics
News and Stories
July 07, 2026
Professional Education
Rethinking Kidney Health: Advancing Combination Therapy in CKD
July 07, 2026
Research
Patient Education
Cardiovascular-Kidney-Metabolic Syndrome (CKM) Has More Options Than Ever. Now What?
September 06, 2016
Prevention & Awareness
8 Key Things to Know Before Taking Supplements
November 08, 2023
Patient Stories
6 Celebrities with Kidney Disease
June 25, 2026
Patient Education
Kidney-Friendly Fourth of July Recipes for Your Summer Cookout
September 04, 2025
Patient Education
What You Should Know About Complement 3 Glomerulopathy (C3G)
January 26, 2018
Prevention & Awareness
5 Common Myths About Kidney Disease Prevention
July 09, 2024
Patient Education
5 Summer Picnic Recipes for a Kidney Disease Diet
August 30, 2022
Patient Education
6 Foods with Added Sugar that Will Surprise You
See More News and Stories
Recipes
Coo Coo
30 minutes
Pumpkin Pancakes
40 minutes
Power Golden Smoothie
30 minutes
Caribbean: Chayote Salad
45 minutes
Simple Cheese Quesadillas
13 minutes
Kidney Friendly Taco Seasoning
5 minutes
BBQ Pineapple Chicken
12 hours 15 minutes
Peanut Butter Oatmeal
20 minutes
Grilled Portobello Mushroom Burgers
30 minutes
See More Recipes
